Blog: Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 vs UI-Builder: A Comprehensive Comparison (#2401)
FlowFuse/website: src/blog/2024/08/comparing-dashboard-2-with-uibuilder.md

UI-Builder has a smaller but still active user community. While not as large as Node-RED Dashboard 2.0's, it includes dedicated users who also engage in forums, contribute to discussions, and share their use cases and solutions.

!["Screenshot of the Ui-Builder package's weekly download chart from npm"](./images/ui-builder-downloads.png )
_Screenshot of the Ui-Builder package's weekly download chart from npm_

## How About Performance and Speed?

### Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 provides reliable performance with efficient real-time updates. Initial page load times might be slower, particularly on mobile, but the overall performance is consistent and effective for dynamic dashboards.

### UI-Builder

Offers faster initial load times and more consistent performance across customizations, but requires extensive setup and customization to achieve optimal results.

## How Fast and Easy is It to Communicate with Node-RED Instances?

### Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 uses WebSockets for bidirectional communication with Node-RED, enabling real-time and faster interactions. Most widgets uses the standard `msg.payload` for communication.

### Ui-builder 

> The ui-builder also employs WebSockets for bidirectional communication, providing real-time and fast interactions. However, it utilizes different types of msg properties, which can be complex for users and might increase the number of nodes unnecessarily for changing the property names.

Author: I mean the different msg properties

## How Much Customizability is Available?

### Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

Node-RED Dashboard 2.0, built on Vue.js, provides a range of customization options through its widget configurations and settings. While it offers predefined UI elements, users can adjust styles and behaviors to fit their needs. Custom CSS can be applied to enhance the appearance of the dashboard using the [ui_template](https://flowfuse.com/blog/2023/12/dashboard-0-10-0/) widget. This widget also allows for building custom components or widgets with Vue components and supports the import and use of third-party libraries.

### UI-Builder

> UI-Builder offers a higher degree of customizability, enabling users to build and style UI elements from scratch. This flexibility is advantageous for those with a solid understanding of frontend development, as it supports the use of any frontend framework or custom design approach. However, it requires more time and expertise to achieve desired results, as users need to handle coding and styling for every UI element they create.

Reviewer: "Customizability" isn't a word

### UI-Builder

Finding UI-Builder is straightforward, as its package name `node-red-ui-builder` is distinct and easily identifiable both on Google and in the Node-RED Palette Manager. This clear naming helps users quickly locate the correct package.

## How Easy is it to Get Started?

## Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

Getting started with Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 is relatively easy due to its low-code approach. It features a sidebar for managing UI widgets, themes, configurations, and settings, with intuitive navigation to the dashboard page. This makes it accessible for users with varying levels of technical expertise.

### UI-Builder

UI-Builder can be more challenging to start with, as it does not follow a low-code approach and lacks a separate sidebar for managing UI elements. Navigating the dashboard built with UI-Builder can be less straightforward, requiring users to have a deeper understanding of coding and UI design principles.

> ## How Easy is it to Migrate from Node-RED Dashboard ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How Easy is it to Migrate from Node-RED Dashboard ?
```

Migrating from Node-RED Dashboard (Dashboard 1.0)

[Node-RED Dashboard](https://flows.nodered.org/node/node-red-dashboard) is a module that provides a set of nodes in Node-RED to quickly create user interfaces or live data dashboards. It was developed by one of the creators of Node-RED and is the most used and downloaded package in the Node-RED ecosystem. However, it is now deprecated. For more information, refer to [Node-RED Dashboard Formally Deprecated](/blog/2024/06/dashboard-1-deprecated/).

### Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

> Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 is developed to replace the the deprecated standard Node-RED Dashboard. It retains the core concepts and UI elements but introduces more advanced options and configurations. To facilitate the transition, FlowFuse, the creator of Node-RED Dashboard 2.0, provides a [migration service](/product/dashboard/#migration-service) that simplifies migration of flows or projects from the Node-RED Dashboard to Node-RED Dashboard 2.0. This service helps ensure a smoother migration process with minimal disruption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 is developed to replace the the deprecated standard Node-RED Dashboard. It retains the core concepts and UI elements but introduces more advanced options and configurations.

To facilitate the transition, FlowFuse, the creator of Node-RED Dashboard 2.0, provides a [migration service](/product/dashboard/#migration-service) that simplifies migration of flows or projects from the Node-RED Dashboard to Node-RED Dashboard 2.0. This service helps ensure a smoother migration process with minimal disruption.
```

### UI-Builder

> Migrating from Node-RED Dashboard 1 to UI-Builder is significantly more complex. UI-Builder does not follow the same concepts or provide the same UI elements as the Node-RED Dashboard. Users will need to recreate their dashboards from scratch, as UI-Builder relies on custom coding and frontend frameworks rather than the predefined, low-code widgets of Node-RED Dashboard. This process can be overwhelming and requires a solid understanding of HTML, CSS and the frontend frameworks if you wanted use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Migrating from Node-RED Dashboard 1 to UI-Builder is significantly more complex. UI-Builder does not follow the same concepts or provide the same UI elements as the Node-RED Dashboard.

Users will need to recreate their dashboards from scratch, as UI-Builder relies on custom coding and frontend frameworks rather than the predefined, low-code widgets of Node-RED Dashboard. This process can be overwhelming and requires a solid understanding of HTML, CSS and the frontend frameworks if you wanted use.
```

## How Active is the Project's Development?

### Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

[Node-RED Dashboard 2.0](https://github.com/FlowFuse/node-red-dashboard/graphs/contributors), which replaced Node-RED Dashboard 1.0 in 2023, has shown consistent and high development activity. The project benefits from a dedicated team that regularly updates and improves it, ensuring it remains current with user needs and technological advancements.

![Screenshot of the Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 GitHub commit chart](./images/dashboard-2-commits.png)  
_Screenshot of the Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 GitHub commit chart._

### UI-Builder

[UI-Builder](https://github.com/TotallyInformation/node-red-contrib-uibuilder/graphs/contributors) has been an active project for a long time and remains active. However, there has been a noticeable decline in development activity starting in early 2024. While the project continues to be maintained, it does not have a dedicated, full-time team.

![Screenshot of the UI-Builder GitHub commit chart](./images/ui-builder-commits.png)  
_Screenshot of the UI-Builder GitHub commit chart._

> ## How Extensive is the Collection of Pre-Built UI Elements?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pre-Built UI Elements
```

Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 offers an extensive set of UI elements, including forms, dropdowns, tables, charts, and gauges that are super easy to use. These widgets are built with complex Vue.js components, but users are completely shielded from this complexity, allowing them to focus on ease of use. Additionally, if you want to create your own custom widget, you can do so with the ui-template node that accepts complete Vue components. By default, Dashboard 2.0 supports the Vuetify library, which provides an extensive set of UI components.

## UI-Builder

UI-Builder also offers a number of widgets, but these are not as user-friendly as those in Dashboard 2.0. Users must send a JSON config object, which can be complex for new users who lack knowledge of HTML/CSS. Additionally, handling widget data requires using UI-Builder's methods, which can further increase complexity. However, UI-Builder's strength lies in its flexibility, allowing any HTML element to be used as a component, and it also supports the W3C standard web components. Despite this, users need to perform a lot of additional tasks to get everything set up and will have the hassle of writing things.

> ## How easy it is to Control UI at runtime?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Changing the UI at Runtime
```

## Building Layout

### Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 offers a collection of pre-defined layouts to make it easy for users to get started quickly. These are available as a configuration for each "Page" of your application.

These predefined layouts provide a solid foundation for most applications. If you need a different layout, Dashboard 2.0 is limited in it's customization in terms of positioning of elements.

### UI-Builder

UI-Builder does not come with predefined layouts, which can make it more complex for users to get started. it does however, provides the flexibility to completely define your own layout using CSS. This approach allows for complete customization, but it requires users to have a good understanding of HTML and CSS. The lack of predefined layouts means users have to create their own from scratch, which can be time-consuming.

> ## How Responsive Are They?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Responsiveness on Mobile
```

---
title: "Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 vs UI-Builder: A Comprehensive Comparison"
subtitle: Understanding the Differences Between Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 and UI-Builder
description: Compare Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 and UI-Builder. Discover their installation ease, customization, performance, and support to find the best solution for your needs. 
date: 2024-08-31
authors: ["sumit-shinde"]
image: 
tags:
    - node-red dashboard
    - ui-builder
    - comparison
    - dashboard

---

When choosing a dashboard solution for Node-RED, two popular options are Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 and UI-Builder. This article compares these tools across several key areas, including installation, ease of use, development activity, and customizability, to help you decide which one best suits your needs.

<!--more-->

> ## How Easy is it to Install?

Reviewer: Would be nice to have a single image split with left-side being a Dashboard 2.0 screenshot and right-side being a UI Builder screenshot. Similar to waht we have in https://flowfuse.com/blog/2023/03/comparing-node-red-dashboards/

This could also just be the blog tile/image once it's ready

### UI-Builder

Finding UI-Builder is straightforward, as its package name `node-red-ui-builder` is distinct and easily identifiable both on Google and in the Node-RED Palette Manager. This clear naming helps users quickly locate the correct package.

## How Easy is it to Get Started?

## Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

Getting started with Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 is relatively easy due to its low-code approach. It features a sidebar for managing UI widgets, themes, configurations, and settings, with intuitive navigation to the dashboard page. This makes it accessible for users with varying levels of technical expertise.

### UI-Builder

UI-Builder can be more challenging to start with, as it does not follow a low-code approach and lacks a separate sidebar for managing UI elements. Navigating the dashboard built with UI-Builder can be less straightforward, requiring users to have a deeper understanding of coding and UI design principles.

> ## How Easy is it to Migrate from Node-RED Dashboard ?

Reviewer: Worth adding a paragraph here of context on what Node-RED Dashboard is, new users of Node-RED will not know.

### UI-Builder

Migrating from Node-RED Dashboard 1 to UI-Builder is significantly more complex. UI-Builder does not follow the same concepts or provide the same UI elements as the Node-RED Dashboard. Users will need to recreate their dashboards from scratch, as UI-Builder relies on custom coding and frontend frameworks rather than the predefined, low-code widgets of Node-RED Dashboard. This process can be overwhelming and requires a solid understanding of HTML, CSS and the frontend frameworks if you wanted use.

## How Active is the Project's Development?

### Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

[Node-RED Dashboard 2.0](https://github.com/FlowFuse/node-red-dashboard/graphs/contributors), which replaced Node-RED Dashboard 1.0 in 2023, has shown consistent and high development activity. The project benefits from a dedicated team that regularly updates and improves it, ensuring it remains current with user needs and technological advancements.

![Screenshot of the Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 GitHub commit chart](./images/dashboard-2-commits.png)  
_Screenshot of the Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 GitHub commit chart._

### UI-Builder

> [UI-Builder](https://github.com/TotallyInformation/node-red-contrib-uibuilder/graphs/contributors) has been an active project for a long time and remains active. However, there has been a noticeable decline in development activity starting in early 2024. While the project continues to be maintained, it does not have a dedicated team and does not receive regular updates as frequently as some other projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[UI-Builder](https://github.com/TotallyInformation/node-red-contrib-uibuilder/graphs/contributors) has been an active project for a long time and remains active. However, there has been a noticeable decline in development activity starting in early 2024. While the project continues to be maintained, it does not have a dedicated, full-time team.
```

![Screenshot of the UI-Builder GitHub commit chart](./images/ui-builder-commits.png)  
_Screenshot of the UI-Builder GitHub commit chart._

> ## How Extensive is the Collection of UI Elements?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How Extensive is the Collection of Pre-Built UI Elements?
```

Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 offers an extensive set of UI elements, including forms, dropdowns, tables, charts, and gauges that are super easy to use. These widgets are built with complex Vue.js components, but users are completely shielded from this complexity, allowing them to focus on ease of use. Additionally, if you want to create your own custom widget, you can do so with the ui-template node that accepts complete Vue components. By default, Dashboard 2.0 supports the Vuetify library, which provides an extensive set of UI components.

## UI-Builder

UI-Builder also offers a number of widgets, but these are not as user-friendly as those in Dashboard 2.0. Users must send a JSON config object, which can be complex for new users who lack knowledge of HTML/CSS. Additionally, handling widget data requires using UI-Builder's methods, which can further increase complexity. However, UI-Builder's strength lies in its flexibility, allowing any HTML element to be used as a component, and it also supports the W3C standard web components. Despite this, users need to perform a lot of additional tasks to get everything set up and will have the hassle of writing things.

> ## How much dynamic insertion or update it support?

Reviewer: Not sure this title is clear. I know what you're trying to say, as I built dynamic options into Dashboard - but think about the user value here.

Something like "Controlling UI at runtime"?

### Node-RED Dashboard

Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 supports dynamically updating the UI via the msg object. Each UI widget supports the `msg.ui_update` property with a JSON object that allows you to update the UI components dynamically. For example, you can update form fields based on user input, dynamically insert or update options in a dropdown, or change the appearance of the UI by sending css classes.

> ### Ui-builder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### UI-Builder
```

UI-Builder also supports dynamic UI updates. Similar to Node-RED Dashboard, you can use messages to control the state and content of UI elements.

> ## Is creating visualizations easy in the Dashboard? ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Data Visualisation
```

### Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

> Visualization is a core use case for Node-RED, and Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 makes it easy with its built-in [chart](https://dashboard.flowfuse.com/nodes/widgets/ui-chart.html) and [gauge widgets](https://dashboard.flowfuse.com/nodes/widgets/ui-gauge.html). The chart widgets support various types, including line, bar, scatter, pie, and donut charts, while the gauge widgets offer options like tile, 3/4 gauge, and half gauge. This range of built-in options simplifies the creation of visualizations. Additionally, you can use Vuetify or other third-party libraries in the ui-template node if you need different types of charts.

Reviewer: _Visualization is a core use case for Node-RED_

No it isn't... Node-RED doesn't do visualisation _without_ a third party node set like Dashboard.

Author: i mean monitoring, will update

### UI-Builder

> UI-Builder does not provide built-in charting options. However, you can add charts using third-party libraries, which can make the visualization setup more complex and time-consuming. This approach requires additional effort to integrate and configure the libraries, potentially increasing the complexity of creating visualizations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UI-Builder does not provide built-in charting options. However, you can add charts using any third-party JavaScript libraries. This approach requires additional effort to integrate and configure the libraries, as well as writing the relevant JavaScript to render the charts. This increases the complexity of creating visualizations, but does offer more control and customisation.
```

## How Fast and Easy is It to Communicate with Node-RED Instances?

### Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 uses WebSockets for communication with Node-RED, enabling real-time and faster interactions. Most widgets uses the standard `msg.payload` for communication that makes it super easy to send the data from Node-RED to client and vice-versa.

### Ui-builder 

> The ui-builder also employs WebSockets for communication, providing real-time and fast interactions. However, it utilizes different msg properties, which can be complex for users and might increase the number of nodes unnecessarily for changing the property names.

Reviewer: I'd remove this section, not sure it's clear to read or adds a valuable comparison

> ## How many Web Layout Does It Support?

Reviewer: This is a mis-leading header as UI Builder offers complete customisation - we do not.

"Building Layouts" would be more appropriate

### Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

> Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 offers three main predefined layouts to make it easy for users to get started quickly. These predefined layouts provide a solid foundation for most applications. However, if you need a different layout, Dashboard 2.0 allows for customization. Each element including the pages can have a custom class applied, and you can write your own custom styling using the ui-template. This flexibility ensures that you can tailor the dashboard to meet your specific needs while maintaining ease of use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 offers a collection of pre-defined layouts to make it easy for users to get started quickly. These are available as a configuration for each "Page" of your application.

These predefined layouts provide a solid foundation for most applications. If you need a different layout, Dashboard 2.0 is limited in it's customization in terms of positioning of elements.
```

### UI-Builder

> UI-Builder does not come with predefined layouts, which can make it more complex for users to get started. Instead, it provides the flexibility to define your own layout using CSS. This approach allows for complete customization, but it requires users to have a good understanding of HTML and CSS. The lack of predefined layouts means users have to create their own from scratch, which can be time-consuming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UI-Builder does not come with predefined layouts, which can make it more complex for users to get started. it does however, provides the flexibility to completely define your own layout using CSS. This approach allows for complete customization, but it requires users to have a good understanding of HTML and CSS. The lack of predefined layouts means users have to create their own from scratch, which can be time-consuming.
```

> ## How Well Do They Support Different Devices and Screen Sizes?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How Responsive Are They?
```

### Node-RED Dashboard 2.0

> Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 is designed with [responsiveness](https://dashboard.flowfuse.com/layouts/) in mind. It ensures that dashboards adapt to different screen sizes and devices, providing a consistent user experience across desktops, tablets, and mobile devices. The dashboard elements are automatically adjusted to fit various resolutions, making it user-friendly for a wide audience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Node-RED Dashboard 2.0 is designed with [responsiveness](https://dashboard.flowfuse.com/layouts/) in mind. It ensures that dashboards automatically adapt to different screen sizes and devices, providing a consistent user experience across desktops, tablets, and mobile devices. The dashboard elements are automatically adjusted to fit various resolutions, making it user-friendly for a wide audience.
```

| **Development Activity**                 | **High**: Regular updates and improvements; actively maintained by a dedicated team | **Moderate**: Active but shows a decline in updates; less frequent enhancements |
| **UI Elements Collection**                | **Extensive**: Includes a wide range of widgets like forms, charts, and gauges; built on Vue.js with Vuetify support | **Flexible but complex**: Allows any HTML element; requires custom coding and handling of UI elements |
| **Visualization**                        | **Easy**: Built-in charting options for various types; additional options with third-party libraries | **Complex**: No built-in charts; requires integration of third-party libraries for visualization |
| **Dynamic Insertion or Update**          | **Supported**: Can dynamically update UI components using `msg.ui_update` property | **Supported**: Dynamic updates possible, but can be more complex to implement |
| **Communication with Node-RED Instances** | **Effective**: Uses WebSockets for real-time, bidirectional communication; standard `msg.payload` usage | **Effective but complex**: Also uses WebSockets; different message properties can complicate setup |

> | **Web Layout Support**                   | **Predefined and customizable**: Offers three main layouts with options for custom styling | **Customizable**: No predefined layouts; users must create their own using CSS |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Web Layout Support**                   | **Predefined**: Offers three main layouts with some options for custom styling | **Customizable**: No predefined layouts; users must create their own using CSS |
```

### UI-Builder

UI-Builder also has good support, with active contributions from the author and the Node-RED community. The documentation is detailed but can be complex due to extensive use of technical language.

## What are the future development plans?

### FlowFuse Dashboard

FlowFuse Dashboard is actively working on enhancing its feature set. With extensive functionality already in place, the project also has ambitious plans to introduce more advanced features to better serve its users. You can track these developments on the [FlowFuse Dashboard GitHub project board](https://github.com/orgs/FlowFuse/projects/15/views/4), where ongoing and upcoming features are documented.

!["Screenshot of the FlowFuse Dashboard GitHub project board"](./images/dashboard-2-project-plan.png )
_Screenshot of the FlowFuse Dashboard GitHub project board_

Additionally, updates about new features and enhancements are also provided through social media, blogs, and the Node-RED forums, ensuring that users stay informed about the latest developments.

### UI-Builder

> UI-Builder does not have a publicly accessible project roadmap or a dedicated planning board for future updates. While development continues, details about forthcoming features and enhancements are regularly updated on the Node-RED Discourse forums by its author. However, having a project roadmap could provide users with a better understanding of upcoming features and planned improvements, making it easier to plan and adapt their projects accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UI-Builder does not have a publicly accessible project roadmap or a dedicated planning board for future updates. While development continues, details about forthcoming features and enhancements are regularly updated on the Node-RED Discourse forums by its author. 
```
